# Count_Paths
Are counts in baseball Markov states, or are they influenced by the previous count?

This question had been floating around in my mind for a while, specifically in the case of a 3-1 count. I figured that a hitter who had already gone 3-0 and then taken a strike would be less likely to swing compared to one who had taken a 2-1 ball. This was actually one of the first questions I tried to answer when I got serious about baseball research. However, there is no way to filter by previous count in Baseball Savant search, and I hadn't yet figured out how to download the raw data with pybaseball, so I was stymied. Thankfully I made a note of the question and so rediscovered it recently. Now that I have the data, it was quite an easy question to answer.

Using all pitch data from 2021 through 2024, I found no significant difference in Z-Swing% or O-Swing% for 3-1 counts following 3-0 or 2-1. However, I did find a 2 percentage point jump in Zone% after 3-0. Perhaps pitchers are more encouraged after 'getting back in the count', or perhaps they are simply more likely to throw a strike after having just thrown one. It's fair to wonder whether such a small difference is really a true feature of the data, but the trend is fairly consistent for each of the four years considered.

It was easy to generalize this approach to other counts as well. Another count which displayed non-Markov tendencies was 2-2. Not only did pitchers pour in 3% more strikes following 1-2 vs 2-1, but batters were 6% more likely to chase an out of zone pitch. In this case, it seems the previous count is affecting both batters (who seem to be in swing-mode after 1-2) and pitchers (who in this case throw more strikes after a ball, the opposite result from 3-1).

My feeling is that this is fairly insignificant. The application of this data would mostly be for a hitter to understand when a pitcher is more likely to throw a hittable pitch. However, these effects are so small that they are likely drowned out on the game-level by random variation, as well as by other factors such as the hitter's offensive prowess, the pitcher's command, and the scoreboard. Still, it was a useful exercise and I am glad to have finally answered my question.
